for the next part of our presentation
we've bought the man himself Angie
mcluhan here to talk to you all as you
all know Andrew is the grandson of
Marcia mcluhan who has inspired much of
the thinking around this Festival
um
his father Eric mcluhan was was
Marshall's eldest son and who worked
with Marshall from the mid 60s until uh
Marshall died in 1980 and from 1980
until his death in 2018 Eric continued
the work he began with his father now
Andrew is taking up the charge and
continuing the family Legacy and
upholding these really important ideas
and also adapting them for the future
um I think I think I'll leave it at that
and I'll let Andrew speak to you all now
enjoy
thank you
uh yeah it's a real pleasure to be here
in the fleshette gray area where I've
been teaching virtually for the last two
years
um
I'm going to read part of a larger work
which I've kind of been working on I've
been thinking about it for several years
recently with uh some generous
assistance from Reggie James an eternal
in New York City I I was able to do some
hard work on it
um it's two parts I'm going to read the
first part which is kind of set up
setting the stage for the second part
which is very practical things it's
called Maelstrom Escape strategies
and the subtitle for purposes of this
talk is diagnosis before prescription
I also I Rely heavily on quotes from
Marshall and Eric mcluhan and in order
to not break the flow I'm just going to
say quote and if you want to know where
things are from you can you can ask me
afterward
this is my very Advanced graphic design
work here
um
Eric starts
the problem faced by any Explorer in our
time as McLean observed is to event
tools that reveal the current situation
not to make logical connected statements
quote connected sequential discourse
which is thought of as rational is
really visual it has nothing to do with
reason as such reasoning does not occur
on single planes or in a continuous
connected fashion
the Mind Leap Frogs they put things
together in all sorts of proportions and
ratios instantly
to put down thoughts encoded lineal ways
was a discovery of the Greek world it is
not done this way for example in the
Chinese world but to deny that the
Chinese have access to reason would be
ridiculous
they do not have rational discourse At
All by Western standards they Reason by
the active interval not by the act of
connection
and the electric age we are moving into
a world where not the connection but the
interval becomes the crucial event in
organization
quote in today's rapidly changing
environment people have two major
concerns to discover the new problems
this environment poses and to develop
ways of coping with these problems
we now become aware of the possibility
of arranging the entire human
environment as a work of art designed to
maximalize possession sorry perception
and to make everyday learning a process
of discovery
quote by studying the pattern of the
effects of this huge Vortex of energy in
which we're involved it may be possible
to program a strategy of evasion and
survival
as early as 1951 in his the mechanical
bride folklore of industrial man
Marshall mcluhan Drew inspiration from
Edgar Allan Poe's 1841 short story a
descent into the Maelstrom
in it Poe's narrator describes how he
was sucked into a giant ocean Vortex or
Maelstrom and by keeping his wits about
him by studying the action of his
environment was able to formulate and
execute an escape strategy and he lived
to tell the tale
quote pattern recognition in the midst
of a huge overwhelming destructive force
is the way out of the Maelstrom
the huge vortices of energy created by
our media present us with possibilities
of evasion of Destruction
by studying the pattern of the effects
of this huge Vortex of energy in which
we are involved it may be possible to
program a strategy of evasion and
survival
it is one of Marshall's enduring
metaphors which he would deploy over and
over during his career and it boils down
to this that we are not helpless
despair is optional as is survival
in Poe's story a fisherman and his two
brothers flirt with disaster one too
many times and are rewarded as expected
two brothers are lost but one survives I
and this should sound familiar
in pursuit of wealth they take great
risks and eventually they can't avoid
the seemingly inevitable it's a numbers
game
and a numbness game
Marshall mcluhan's Hope was that the
analogy holds all the way through to
today
there's little doubt that we are in the
midst of a terrible Vortex the signs are
all around us that all is not well
Poe's sailor had the advantage a dubious
comfort that the cause of his misery was
quite obvious however the cause of our
misery is less clear
we don't know who discovered water but
we know it wasn't a fish
we're battling less the forces of Mother
Nature and more the forces of our own
nature
it is in our nature to be ignorant of
many things our heads stuck in the sand
as if ignorance somehow frees us from
responsibility however ignorance of
cause of causes is not freedom of
effects
it may be well to ask whether we need to
remain in the state and whether we can
afford to
quote we can think things out before we
put them out
it's an odd thing a marshall didn't
always believe that we could do very
much he wasn't always of the opinion
that quote determinism is the result of
the behavior of those who are determined
to ignore what is happening
in an essay from 1955 he said
improvements in the means of
communication are usually based on a
shift from one sense to another and this
involved a rapid refocusing in all
previous experience it is therefore a
simple maximum of communication study
that any change in the means of
communication will produce a chain of
revolutionary consequences at every
level of culture and politics
but here's the kicker he adds because of
the complexity of the components of this
process prediction and control are not
possible
so in 1955 he felt that these things
were too complicated in order for us
mere mortals to understand and we don't
really have a hope of control
but in 1960 he wrote that we could quote
study the modes of the media in order to
hike all consumptions out of the
subliminal nonverbal realm for scrutiny
and for prediction and control of human
purposes
so what happened
how did Marshall mcluhan go from
helpless to Hopeful what made him turn
around and dive head first into the
Maelstrom
in 1958 Marshall mcloone was given a
grant from the National Association of
educational broadcasters in Washington
D.C to develop a curriculum for high
school students for the quote study of
New Media
he took a sabbatical from his position
at St Michael's College where he was an
English professor and spent the next
year in a bit deconstructing media and
constructing methods for their study
quote recognition of the psychic and
social consequences of Technology makes
it possible to neutralize the effects of
innovation
there is absolutely no inevitability as
long as we are willing to contemplate
the situation
the neb Grant gave him the means to
study the modes of the media and it was
this work which would give him much of
the foundation from which he built his
methods
it was here that he turned
Communications study into media study by
a vast broadening of the category of
what a medium is
from an extension quote the personal and
social consequences of any medium that
is of any extension of ourselves result
from the new scale that is introduced
into human Affairs by each extension of
ourselves or by any new technology
from an extension to an environment
quote the medium is the message because
the environment transforms our
perceptions governing the areas of
attention and neglect a light
there is no kind of Technology from
speech to clothes to satellites to
computers that does not constitute an
environment of services and disservices
from an extension to an environment to
everything a human makes or does quote
everything that man makes and does every
process every style every artifact every
poem Song painting gimmick Gadget Theory
technology every product of human effort
unquote
some might argue that the category
brought in so far as to be meaningless
but I would suggest that it broadens it
far enough to be meaningful
quote the present book in seeking to
understand many media the conflicts from
which they spring and the even greater
conflicts to which they give rise holds
out the promise of reducing these
conflicts by an increase in human
autonomy
an increase in human autonomy
quote it is now perfectly plain to me
that all media are environments all
media have the effects that geographers
and biologists have associated with
environments in the past
the medium is the message because the
environment transforms our perceptions
governing the areas of attention and
neglect alike
the relation of environment to
anti-environment
somewhere after understanding media was
published in 1964 Marshall mcluhan took
what I call an environmental turn
in as 1965 essay the relation of
environment to anti-environment it marks
this perceptual shift to seeing the
quote psychic and social effects of
Technologies as an environment of
services and disservices as environments
as that happens Marshall was yet to
realize that this perceptual shift had
occurred as a result of Sputnik as the
inevitability of ecological thinking
applied to his own work and studying the
nature of human innovation
quote as any new technology any
extension or amplification of human
faculties when given human sorry
material embodiment tends to create a
new environment this is as true of
clothing as of speech or script or wheel
a crucial feature of this essay is the
promotion of the artist from A supplier
of aesthetic objects to an indispensable
agent of perceptual awareness
this is one of the big dilemmas in the
whole project how to make known the
unknown how do you perceive what you
can't perceive
quote it is useful to notice all of the
Arts and Sciences as acting in the role
of anti-environments that enable us to
perceive the environment
when we live in a museum without walls
or has music as a structural part of our
sensory environment new strategies of
attention and perception have to be
created
this notion of anti-environment is very
useful
I often think of comedians as
anti-environmentalists of this sort for
example Jerry Seinfeld who seems to have
built a career on perception and he's
always saying you ever notice that
Street artists are also great at getting
us to notice things we don't generally
notice Banksy for example once did a
play on vermeer's girl with a Pearl
Earring he picked a rather plain looking
brick wall which featured a round object
I think it was a security alarm and used
it as the Pearl Earring and he recreated
vermeer's piece around it
what strategies might we employ to
notice what's happening to us
what's become habitual beneath our
notice
quote our typical response to a
disrupting new technology is to recreate
the old environment instead of heeding
the new opportunities of the new
environment
we generally use the new thing to do the
job of the old thing before discovering
what the new things can do with the new
thing
it's artists who are out there on the
edge exploring the possibilities and
they rarely get any thanks
what they produce is often an insult to
the sensibilities of the people who are
set in ways formed by earlier
Technologies
the funny thing is that what seems edgy
today will frequently seem tame tomorrow
quote the Artist as a maker of
anti-environments permits us to perceive
that much is newly environmental and
therefore most active in transforming
situations
it was his convention that when it's
invisible it's invincible
we can't break a habit we don't know we
have we can't address an effect when we
don't know its cause
there is a deep-seated repugnance in the
human breast against understanding the
processes in which we are involved
such understanding involves far too much
responsibility he wrote to his friend
Jacques maritane
I'm not sure we're as afraid of
responsibility now as we once were
the new generation of people leading
Innovations seem much less motivated by
money much less at the mercy of greed
and much more sincere in wanting to
create a better world for all
the medium or environment is the message
it's an odd thing the medium is the
message five seemingly straightforward
words and yet they've caused much
confusion and Bluster
what do you mean the medium is the
message the message is the message
he was interviewed once and Newman the
interviewer said why is the medium the
message why is not the message the
message to which Marshall replied
where would you look for the message in
an electric light the medium and the
message are the same
you might be able to break people down
into two basic categories when it comes
to the medium is the message or for that
matter when it comes to mclu and work at
all one group of people will encounter a
statement like that and say it doesn't
make any sense and move on
another we'll encounter it and say it
doesn't make any sense and move in
juicy pieces of meat
content matters a lot
but the medium doesn't carry the content
as much as the content carries the
medium
one of the major keys to decoding
mcluhan is to always keep in mind that
he was an English Professor an expert in
modernist poetry and he was in several
senses a poet himself
this can make people uncomfortable for
some reason they have a hard time
reconciling the facts so they either
discount it or dismiss him
the relative irony here is Marshall was
very much concerned with content he made
his living teaching poetry and writing
books
metaphors were his bread and butter
media study was sort of his side Hustle
quote my study of literature became an
aid to the perception that led me to
undertake the task of understanding the
relation between culture and Technology
a favorite poet of martials was T.S
Eliot who wrote
um I think in 1933 the chief use of the
meaning of a poem in the ordinary sense
may be for here again I'm speaking of
some kinds of poetry and not all to
satisfy one habit of the reader to keep
his mind diverted and quiet while the
poem does its work upon him much as the
imaginary burglar is always provided
with a nice piece of meat for the house
dog
it was also poet also Elliott who said
amateur poets borrow mature poet steal
the actual quote is a little bit
different and it's worth looking at it's
from Essence eliot's essay on Philip
messenger in the secret wood if you want
to look it up
30 years after Elliott wrote that
Marshall used it and said in
understanding media for the content of a
medium is like the juicy piece of meat
carried by the burglar to distract the
Watchdog of the mine
which I feel is a hilarious callback to
Elliot's essay on messenger and his
insertion that quote good poets make it
into something better or at least
something different
but distract
for what purpose
and what's being stolen
Elliott in 33 in mcluhan in 64 are
talking about the same thing only
mcluhan takes it out of poetry and into
the broader world of human innovation
quote the effects of New Media on our
sensory lives are similar to the effects
of new poetry they change not our
thoughts but the structure of our world
Elliot is saying that while we read
poetry poetry rearranges our sensibility
and that this happens while we're
involved with or distracted by the
content of the poem it happens on the
side on the sly
mcluhan is saying that Technologies
poetry being a technology a human
Innovation rearrange our sensibilities
and this happens while we're busy
creating consuming critiquing arguing
about even pointedly ignoring the
content
actually ignoring it is about the worst
thing you can do
the medium is the message the massage it
is what it does
it's not that content is irrelevant it's
that the main effect doesn't come from
the content it comes from how we are
changed individually and societally
because of the presence of these
technological extensions of ourselves
ignoring it only gives it absolute power
content is that juicy piece of meat
which keeps us busy
and this is why media literacy while
important is of limited value
zoom in tools like it have equally
changed work and much more regardless of
where you work or what your work entails
it's changed the office it's changed the
home
if you don't leave home for work you
don't come home from work
and it's changed everything between work
and home it's changed you
another juicy piece of meat is when we
spend undue time debating about whether
a given technology is good or bad
it's not that we shouldn't have these
discussions but that they are beside the
point because how we feel about
something like that has nothing to do
with its effect on us
quote the effects of Technology do not
occur at the level of opinions or
concepts but Alder sense ratios or
patterns of perceptions steadily and
without resistance
there's a lot more but I'm a little late
of town ahead of time and I'm made of
town
and I just want to say a bit about part
two so this was kind of setting up the
main event which is Maelstrom Escape
strategies
and the idea is that
to use Edgar Allan Poe's analogy where
in this technological Vortex and what do
we do about it and the way I see it it's
it's three things
first we need to escape because we're
kind of in the middle of it and not
doing so great
um
we need to survive
so you know we need to take care of
ourselves and put ourselves in a
position where we can't escape
and then only from a position of Escape
or relative safety can we think about
um avoidance not getting into them in
the future
uh and my overall point with this is
that Marshall mcluhan went from
believing that these processes were too
complicated human human Innovation too
complicated to understand and hope to
control to after spending over a year
deeply studying them deciding that well
actually you know we can if we study
them maybe have some hope of controlling
them and I think we can not only do that
today but we're getting so deep down the
vortex that we kind of have to
and that's it thank you very much
foreign
thanks so much Andrew
um you know something that has been
really has really like let's move over
to the side of the of the stage um
something that we has become you know
really clear through looking through the
amazing documents from your archive is
that you know Marshall had a real
frustration at the time with the global
Elite not listening and not paying
attention he regularly called them somed
ambulists in his writing saying they
were sleepwalking through some of the
most important things that were
happening around them
um and you know it's really funny to go
through the archive because you all of
the things that people were saying back
to him I'm here you know you hear
repeated uh every day um about the
internet about video games about Tick
Tock you name it um so I'm wondering
like how how are you feeling in this
current moment where there are clearly
so many important messages in this work
that may or may not actually be being
internalized by their intended
recipients yeah
um can you hear me is this thing on cool
um you know the overall feeling I have
and maybe it doesn't seem rational
uh is Hope
and the thing is is people a lot smarter
than me have realized that we can do
better than we're doing and there are a
few reasons I've hoped for one when
Marshall mcloone first said the medium
is the message in 1958 people thought he
was crazy and for quite a while after
and actually a lot of people still think
he's crazy but um I can do a class on
the medium is a message and within about
five or ten minutes people are like yeah
well that makes sense it's kind of
obvious so we I think we've we've caught
up a lot cognitively to where we can
accept ideas like that
and the other thing is that I believe
that human Ingenuity has gotten us into
these messes and human Ingenuity can get
us out of them as well
um and it seems kind of ridiculous to
take something somebody wrote in 1841 as
a fictional short story and use it today
practically
but Marshall believed that the parallels
were one to one that by studying the
patterns of the vortices of power in
which were emerged we can play and
Escape strategies
um and so yeah I'm hopeful
awesome thank you so much Andrew thanks
for coming all the way down from Canada
thank you very much yeah we appreciate
it
[Applause]